---
layout: page
title: GIS as a Reproducible Science
---
In the analysis by Wright et al. 1997, the authors concluded that GIS was considered to be on a continuum ranging from a tool to a science. The larger GIS community, as studied in various online chat exchanges, understood GIS as a science only when it contributed to a substantive problem. Science is generally a white, Eurocentric field that is heavily gate kept, and I believe that relegating GIS to just a tool or a process of tool-making is an example of the classic gatekeeping that seems embedded in our hierarchical system of science. However, the discussions covered in Wright et al. were in a context of trying to gain funding from the National Science Foundation, meaning that using elitist language and definitions for GIS as a science that conforms with prior values and definitions of what science is, might have been a necessary evil. Since "doing science" is code for academic legitimacy (Wright et al. 1997), we can make our own definitions of what science means and the values of GIS outside the world of academia and grant writing, while slowly pushing back against the hierarchical system of peer-reviewed literature.

Gate keeping and science also lends itself to issues in reproducibility and replicability. There is an incentive to not make code, data or specific methods public in order to retain prestige of making a "new" scientific discovery, and having control over who can and cannot contribute to the field of science. Open source GIScience does a good job pushing back against gatekeeping by making data, code and methods public, and also lends credibility to GIS analyses and discoveries by allowing anyone to critique and improve upon existing methods and theories. The next step now is to increase accessibility to the knowledge and skills required to understand GIS analyses, so that the field can truly transcend boundaries of hierarchy and elitism.

Sources:
* Wright, D. J., M. F. Goodchild, and J. D. Proctor. 1997. GIS: Tool or science? Demystifying the persistent ambiguity of GIS as “tool” versus “science.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 87 (2):346–362. DOI: 10.1111/0004-5608.872057
* National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. Reproducibility and Replicability in Science. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. DOI: 10.17226/25303
