---
layout: page
title: Humanitarian GIS
---

Volunteered geographic information (VGI) is becoming increasingly prevalent through the use of social media as well as long terms and conditions agreements that allow services like Twitter to share location data. Crawford & Finn (2014) discuss the analytical and ethical challenges that come with using social media and cell phone data to analyze crises. Analyzing big data gathered from social media has led to important insights in how we respond to crises, allowing resources to be reallocated to spaces where it is most needed. However, using data gathered from people who are experiencing very real trauma brings many ethical concerns. In a time of crisis, people might be more willing to tweet personal information about their health or location than they would normally. Crawford & Finn ask important questions on whether sharing information during a crisis should count as consent as we would normally define it, and what power dynamics come into play when researchers use big data from times of crisis. I agree with Crawford & Finn that every researcher should ask themselves these questions. I think many times, the positives that can come from using big data to save more lives in the next crisis, outweighs the ethical ambiguities.

Beyond just the ethical problem for using big data to analyze crises, is the uncertainty that can be introduced throughout these kinds of analyses. Longley (2008) discusses how uncertainty is introduced into every step of geographical analysis, taking us farther and farther away from reality. In crisis data, Crawford & Finn talk about how the data drifts from reality in that only people who have internet access or cell service in a crisis can post to social media. There is also a temporal bias to crisis data, as most of the data analyzed is really just a snapshot of one point in a disaster, as disaster recover can take years after the disaster itself. Although big data analysis of crisis data can be helpful in analyzing how to better respond to future disasters, these analyses should not be taken without questions of how accurately they represent reality. 

Sources:
* Crawford, K., and M. Finn. 2014. The limits of crisis data: analytical and ethical challenges of using social and mobile data to understand disasters. GeoJournal 80 (4):491–502. DOI:10.1007/s10708-014-9597-z
* Longley, P. A., M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire, and D. W. Rhind. 2008. Geographical information systems and science 2nd ed. Chichester: Wiley. (only chapter 6: Uncertainty, pages 127-153)
